---
layout:       post
title:        "Item weights vs. the Paradox of Rarity"
categories:   [math]
tags:         [random]
description:  'This post describes using item *weights* to define the relative frequence'
plotly:       true
---

In a bluesky [post](https://bsky.app/profile/tylerglaiel.com/post/3ldd5qyzy6s2n) Tyler Glaiel describes a drop rate issue which he terms the *"Paradox of Rarity"*.

For a simplifed straw-man example imagine we have monsters that drop two classes of items:

1. *common* which drop 90% of the time
2. *uncommon* which drop 10% of the time

and some given monster's table has 9 common and 1 uncommon items. Individually each of the the tens items end up occuring 10% of the time which is certainly not the design intent. The problem here is that the category rates are being defined independently from the number of items in each. I suggested using "per item weights" as a correction and in this mini-post I'll expand on the idea into something (hopefully) meaningful.

Sticking with the above example let's say we assign a weight of 1 for uncommon and 10 for common.  We have nine common items so the total weight of the common items is $\left(9 \cdot 10\right)$, one uncommon so its weight is $\left(1 \cdot 1\right)$ and a total weight of $91$.  We then have:

1. select from the *common* set with probability of $\frac{90}{91}$ which is approximately $0.989011$.  Each of the common items occur at $\frac{10}{91}$ which is approximately $0.10989$.
2. the single *uncommon* item will occur at $\frac{1}{91}$ which is approximately $0.010989$.

So starting with an empty inventory and griding this monster we expect to see 10 times as many of *each* of the common items per uncommon. This what our selected weights are defining.

If we add an item to the uncommon list then rate of *each* common/uncommon becomes: $ \left( \frac{10}{92}, \frac{1}{92} \right) $ which maintains the desired per item rates which is $10:1$.

To generalize let's say we have $j$ categories where $n_c$ is the number of items and $w_c$ is the weight of category $c$ respectively then the total weight of the category is:

$$ t_c = w_c n_c $$

the sum of all category weights is:

$$ T = \sum_{k=0}^{j-1} t_k$$

the rate at which we choose from category $c$ is:

$$ r_c = \frac{t_c}{T} $$

the rate of an individual item from category $c$ is:

$$ i_c = \frac{w_c}{T} $$

Now this "collection" of numbers can be simply examined using a spreadsheet.  As an example choosing to have four categories where each "more common" one is 10 times more likely than the previous then we have:

<div id="spreadsheet"></div>

\\
Notice that each $i_c$ is $10 \times$ more likely than the next. This "spreadsheet" is interactive so if you go an modifiy the $n_c$ entry for any of the categories then all of them update to a new values *but* the $10 \times$ relationship is maintained (well I'm disallowing zero because that's boring).  FWIW: clicking on a computed value shows the *EXCEL* style equation.

And there's nothing special about this $10 \times$ relationship other than being easy to eyeball the probabilities are doing "the expected thing".

There is *alot* more that could be said on this topic but I think this is sufficient to spitball my comment about *item weights*.

<script src="https://bossanova.uk/jspreadsheet/v5/jspreadsheet.js"></script>
<script src="https://jsuites.net/v5/jsuites.js"></script>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://jsuites.net/v5/jsuites.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://bossanova.uk/jspreadsheet/v5/jspreadsheet.css" type="text/css" />

<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Material+Icons" />


<script>
jspreadsheet(document.getElementById('spreadsheet'), {
    worksheets: [{
        data: [
            [ 'common',   1000, 32, '=B1*C1', '=D1/D5', '=B1/D5' ],
            [ 'uncommon',  100, 17, '=B2*C2', '=D2/D5', '=B2/D5' ],
            [ 'rare',       10,  5, '=B3*C3', '=D3/D5', '=B3/D5' ],
            [ 'ultra rare',  1,  1, '=B4*C4', '=D4/D5', '=B4/D5' ],
            [ 'total $(T)$'   ,   ,   , '=SUM(D1:D4)' ],
        ],
        columns: [
            { type: 'text',   title:'category', width:'110'   },
            { type: 'number', title:'weight $(w_c)$',  width:'110'   },
            { type: 'number', title:'items  $(n_c$)',  width:'100'   },
            { type: 'number', title:'$t_c$',                         },
            { type: 'number', title:'$r_c$', width:'200'             },
            { type: 'number', title:'$i_c$', width:'200' },
        ]
    }]
});
</script>

